We've covered a lot of ground in our
module on analytical technologies.
We've talked about data storage,
including a detailed look
at the relational database.
We've also outlined a number of
different types of tools that exist
in the world of data and
data analytics, both traditional and
emerging, including exposure to ideas
like big data and cloud computing.
In this video we're going to
take a look at how data analysts
actually use some of these tools.
For now, we're going to do
this at a really high level.
You'll have plenty of opportunity in later
modules and courses to go deeper and
do exactly how certain operations and
analyses are done.
There are a lot of different tools and
techniques out there and
we couldn't possibly cover them all.
However, we will cover just a few
common ways analysts work with data and
how one might think about using
one type of tool versus another.
We'll start by looking at three broad
methodologies a data analyst might employ
to access and analyze data.
Let's call the first method
the intermediate file approach.
In this approach we extract
data from a database or
other location where data is stored,
and we export the data we need into
a standalone file like a text file or
Excel file.
This often involves writing SQL code
against the database to extract
just the data we need.
We then import the data into an analytical
tool like Excel, a business intelligence
tool, or a statistical software package or
programming environment.
Once the data is in
the analytical environment I can
execute whatever type
of analysis is desired.
Note that this approach assumes that all
the data I need is already integrated in
one database environment.
So why might I use this approach?
For starters, you might not be able to
connect your analytical tools directly to
your database due to security or
stability concerns.
Or you may not have time to
set up all the permissions and
network connections required
to make a direct connection.
It might be the case that you need to
extract the data at one point in time and
analyze it later or analyze it offline.
You might also want to drive the same
data set into multiple analytical tools.
In these cases, it's more convenient to
store the data in an intermediate file and
import it for analysis.
Finally, by breaking access into two
steps I have a little mores control and
visibility into each steps, which might
be useful for data validation and
quality control.
A second method might be called
the direct connection approach.
Wth this approach we connect our
analytics tool directly to a database or
other data source using what's called
an open database connectivity, or
ODBC connection, or some other application
program interface or API connection.
Broadly, APIs are standard mechanisms for
exchanging information between programs,
and ODBC is one special case of
an API used to connect to databases.
Most analytical tools have the ability
to connect directly to the most
common database systems and
a number of other common data sources.
In this approach, I use the analytical
tool interface to set up a connection and
identify the data I want to access.
Usually this involves the same
ideas as SQL queries on a database.
The tool executes the extraction
operation in the background,
and that can proceed with
whatever analysis is desired.
There are a couple nice things about
the direct connection approach.
First, it cuts out a couple
of steps in the process
since I don't need to export and
import data using an intermediate file.
Secondly, a direct
connection can be set up to
automatically refresh as
the underlying data changes.
Meaning that my analytical
work can be refreshed as well
to reflect the most recent information.
On the downside, it can require a bit of
set up to establish the actual connection
to the database.
And it's a little bit harder to be sure
that the extraction process is happening
as intended.
Offline analysis can be
a bit trickier as well
as we need to make sure we have
a copy of our data stored locally.
The last method we'll cover is what we'll
call the downstream integration approach.
It's quite often the case in data
analytics that the information we need is
located in a bunch of different
locations and formats.
While it would be nice to have everything
on one warehouse, it doesn't always makes
sense to spend the time and energy to
put everything there prior to analysis.
Especially if we're not entirely sure
those sources will turn out to be
important.
The newer and more complex the analysis,
the more likely it is that we'll need to
do at least some integration
in the analytical environment.
In cases like this, we generally use a
broader set of API and ODBC connections as
our analytical tool of choice to connect
to several sources concurrently.
And use additional functionality
in the tool to integrate the data
construct analytical data sets.
We then proceed, as we would,
using the other methods.
Of course, there are a number of other
approaches that we might take when
working with data to get
the results we're looking for,
including hybrids of the ones
we've discussed here.
For example, I might perform
certain manipulations in Excel,
and then import the results into
a more sophisticated analysis tool.
I can also do the opposite,
using an advanced tool to
isolate some set of data that I
want to incorporate into Excel.
Perhaps into a business or
financial model.
The approach you take in any
situation will depend on what it is
you're trying to do.
But one thing we haven't really
discussed is when you'd want to use
one tool versus another.
This is a really complicated question and
the answer depends not only on
the capabilities of the tool itself but on
the skills of the analysts, the nature of
the data environment and even the
organization in which an analyst works.
In our video on data and analysis tools
we broadly discussed what functions
each type of tool is designed to perform,
but we also saw that there's
quite a bit of overlap in
the capabilities of different tools.
What one analyst finds really
easy to do in one application
another analyst might find more
intuitive in a different application.
That having been said, here are a few
ideas that you can start with
that I've drawn from my own experience
in leading analytical teams.
But you'll have to discover what
works best in your environment.
Let's start with Excel.
Excel is really great for
quick and dirty analyses.
Basic charts and graphs are for when you
want to share your analysis with business
partners who don't have access
to more sophisticated tools.
Excel also makes certain types
of manipulations really easy,
like calculations that depend
on multiple rows of data.
And it's a great environment for
trial and error around really
complicated calculations since you
can see every formula in every cell.
It also turns out that an awful
lot of financial modeling and
business case development
is done in excel.
When analysis outputs are used as
the inputs to these Excel models,
it can be convenient just to
start in that environment.
On the flipside, Excel is not necessarily
a great tool for sharing data broadly or
for developing standard reports or
dashboards.
There's also a size limitation.
The baseline Excel product can only
handle about 1 million rows of data,
which may not be large enough for
some analysis.
Although with Microsoft's power pivot
plug-in, larger data sets can be handled.
Even with less than 1 million rows,
performance can be sluggish on
anything but high-end machine.
Let's move on to business intelligence
tools, which includes standard reporting,
data visualization, and
data exploration tools.
These tools are a good choice for a wide
variety of analytical needs intended
to make complex manipulation of data
easier and faster than other tools.
It goes without saying that the analysis
requires extensive exploration or
advance visualization techniques.
Tools suited to those operations
will produce better results.
Additionally, some organizations will
have tools that permanently sit on top of
a data environment and provide pre-built
data structures like cubes, or
predefined calculations that facilitate
repeated analytic operations.
Business intelligence tools are also
preferable in cases when the output of
analysis will be shared broadly or
turned into a standard report
since they typically include more advanced
scheduling distribution functionality.
Statistical modeling and
advanced programming tools
are the obvious choice when we need to do
highly sophisticated analysis, especially
using advanced analytic techniques.
There are ways of incorporating more
advanced techniques into both Excel and
other applications using plugins or
complimentary applications.
In fact, we'll be using some
of these in later courses.
However, few of these work
were really well at scale,
where we need to analyze
very large datasets, or
where we need to drive the results of our
analysis back into business operations.
There are also cases where we want to
have a really high degree of flexibility,
where we need very fast performance or
where we want to build analytics directly
into other software or data processes.
In these cases, we might want to
code our analytics from scratch
using a programming language adept
at performing data manipulation.
The downside of this approach is that
we have to build things from scratch.
We give up a lot of the simplification
that's provided by more user
friendly tools.
So what should you take
away from this discussion?
First, you should recognize that
there are a lot of different ways of
navigating through the analytical process.
But there are a few common ways that
we'll apply more often than not.
Secondly, when it comes to tools,
there's always more than one
way to accomplish anything.
But there are some broad considerations
that can help you pick which tool is right
for the job.
But like we said at the beginning of this
module, the most powerful tool you have as
a data analyst is the one
right here between your ears.
If you have a solid thought process and
a good foundation of knowledge
about your data environment,
you'll be well down the road to success
regardless of the tools you choose.